# Intel 4001
The Intel 4001 is known as the ROM. It stores all the program code (and sometimes data), but can not be changed. The CPU can use up to 16 of them being read from for any given program. It has commands only for reading and writing from its I/O ports. Let's look at it in the same way as the CPU.
## Pins
The chip has 16 pins for communication between the CPU and I/O Chips.
### Data Bus
The communication layer between itself and the CPU. It holds 4-bits at a time.
### I/O Lines
Reads data from the CPU, or writes data to the CPU, using whatever is connected to the I/O lines.
### CM-ROM
A single pin input that signals when memory is needed.
### Vss
The highest voltage. Essentially Hi
### Vdd
Lo voltage.
### Clock Phase 1 & 2
Two different clock phases for each clock cycle.
### Sync
A single input used to ensure a chip doesn't deviate from the current cycle.
### Reset
A single input that sets the buffer and flip-flops to 0.
## CL
Clears the I/O buffer.
## Timing
Timing is the same as the CPU. It uses the same 8-cycle instruction cycle.
### Cycle A1
The ROM checks whether or not it is the correct ROM chip to send data.
### Cycles A2-A3
The ROM gets the address sent by the CPU
### Cycles M1-M2
The ROM sends the data at the current address to the CPU in 4-bit increments. This is why I use a 4-bit structure for the ROM.
### Cycles X1-X3
This is only used when specific instructions are run. On the `SRC` instruction cycle, if the CPU intends to use the ROM, it will send a nibble corresponding to the ROM chip it wants to use. On the next instruction cycle, the ROM will read the low nibble of the following instruction to determine whether it should send/recieve data for the CPU.
## Static Data
The 4001 has certain data that cannot be mutated because it is built into the ROM during manufacturing. This is the chip number, set to a number between 0 and 15, and the ROM data.
## Instructions
The ROM can do very primitive things when the CPU tells it to, solely for communication with other devices.
### Send Register Control (`SRC`)
The ROM checks against the bits sent on X2 to see if it is the correct ROM chip
### Write ROM Port (`WRR`)
The specified ROM sets the I/O bits to what the CPU sends it. This will continue to be true until new data is sent to it.
### Read ROM Port (`RDR`)
The specified ROM reads data at the I/O ports. It can also both send and recieve 2 bits of data if the CPU sends 1XX0 with the command, where X is the output bits.

[Prev](2_Intel-4004.md) | [Next](4_Intel-4002.md)