# Intel 4002
The Intel 4002 is the RAM of the Intel 4000 series. The CPU is able to use up to 8 of them at a time. It also has instructions for reading and writing from its I/O ports, but also commands for reading and writing data to it.
## Pins
The chip, like the ROM, has 16 pins for talking with the CPU and its I/o component.
### Data Bus
The communication layer between itself and the CPU. It holds 4-bits at a time.
### I/O Lines
Reads data from the CPU, or writes data to the CPU, using whatever is connected to the I/O lines.
### CM-RAM
A single pin input that signals when memory is going to be used.
### Vss
The highest voltage. Essentially Hi
### Vdd
Lo voltage.
### Clock Phase 1 & 2
Two different clock phases for each clock cycle.
### Reset
A single input that sets the buffer and all RAM to 0.
### Po
Hard Wired Chip Select Input. Used to determine what chip is being used. (I would implement this as just a chip number like in ROM.)
## Timing
Timing is the same as the CPU. It uses the same 8-cycle instruction cycle.
### Cycle M2
If the RAM has recieved an `SRC` instruction on the prior instruction cycle, it will then be signaled to recieve the low nibble of the instruction from the CPU on this frame. The RAM recieves one CM-RAM line, and the low nibble sent from the ROM is read by both the CPU and the RAM at the same time (because all the components are connected to the same data bus).
### Cycle X1-X3
When the CPU recieves an `SRC` command, it will output one CM-RAM line and send out the register pair specified within the command to all RAM on X2 and X3, which specifies which cart (C), which register (R), and which character (H) within the register to use, in the format `CCRR HHHH`. On X2 of the next instruction cycle, the RAM recieves the accumulator through the buffer, which it then either stores, puts it in its I/O port, or overwrites its it with data depending on the instruction.
## Data
The RAM has 2 types of data is stores for each of its 4 registers: 16 nibbles of data and 4 nibbles for "status". The CPU can either specify an index for the RAM to use using the specified register pair in the `SRC` instruction, or it can select a single nibble to use for the selected register as a command.
## Instructions
### Read RAM Character (`RDM`)
The RAM sends out the previously specified character of data.
### Write RAM Character (`WRM`)
The RAM sets the previously specified character of data to the buffer.
### Read RAM Status (`RD0`-`RD3`)
The RAM sends out the specified status from the previously specified register.
### Write RAM Status (`WD0`-`WD3`)
The RAM sets the specified status of the previously specified register.
### Write Memory Port (`WMP`)
The RAM sets the I/O ports to be the current buffer. The I/O will stay that way until it recieves an instruction to change.
### Add Memory with Carry (`ADM`) & Subtract Memory with Borrow (`SBM`)
This is for the CPU more than the RAM itself. It is an `RDM` call, but the CPU adds or subtracts the accumulator from the recieved data.

[Prev](3_Intel-4001.md) | [Next](5_Motherboard.md)